ok we're here with the president we're
very excited to be here
I'm very excited to be very grateful
thank you very much
you must be little wistful you must be a
little like david ortiz about a month
ago where you know you're you're going
on to great things in the next chapter
of your life start hitting and you're
still heading but my feeder but but you
know you'll never quite have a job as
exhilarating
well you know it it is time I tell
people that this has been a great run
I have loved this job I'm not going to
pretend that there haven't been moments
of great frustration but it is a
singular privilege I think I'm as good a
President now as I've ever been because
you learned stuff every eight years
you've sort of been around the track a
bunch of times but I also see now the
wisdom of the founders that at a certain
point you have to let go for the
democracy to work
sure that there has to be fresh legs
there have to be new people and you have
to have the humility to recognize that
you know you're a citizen and and you go
back to being a citizen after after this
offices is over so we're just trying to
run through the tape and the great thing
is I've got an unbelievable team around
me of people who have done extraordinary
work i'm sort of the frontman for it and
that's very modest well you know the
fact that you that the team won't be
there in the same way i think is the
only thing that's where you have a
little bit of regret we're a week out
from the election
yeah and I you're a history buff i think
it when we look back if mr. Trump is
defeated
I'm hopeful that we will be the takeaway
will be that socialism was not such a
dirty word anymore because of our friend
Bernie Sanders and I just wondering
where someone who
was accused of being a socialist
metaphor what do you think about the
idea that in America yes we're
capitalist but some things just should
not be for the profit motive healthcare
prisons the military elections and i
would add news gathering people say get
the money out of politics i think you
gotta get out at the news business first
we're never gonna learn anything
well it cut couple things i say first of
all you know if you look at the United
States Canada Europe all the advanced
democracies then clearly you've got to
have a market-based system because it's
really productive and it spurs on
innovation and freedom and
entrepreneurship and you get have a
social welfare state and you in some
ways the label socialism doesn't make
that much sense in a context where
there's no economy that doesn't have
some socialist elements meaning that
there's some common goods that we all
agree
everybody should have that's what social
security is that's what Medicare is to
some extent that's what public schools
are we all chip in to make sure that
everybody no matter the circumstances of
your birth have these baseline goods and
as you know i felt pretty strongly that
healthcare should be one of those one of
those goods
I've also said in the past that if I
were designing a system from scratch
I would have probably looked at a
single-payer system but we do have
legacy systems and and that's the only
thing that sometimes when I've had
conversations with burning I've said to
him that we don't start from scratch
there you've got one trillion dollar
healthcare industry for example and you
got a lot of people who are working for
and a lot of special interests involved
and so my goal in the Affordable Care
Act was if i can get millions more
people insurance then that's my first
goal because for them this is not an
abstraction it's like I'm not going to
lose my home or my kids going to get
coverage and that's what we've done but
I see it as a starter home and then the
question is how do we make sure
everybody ultimately gets it because
there are still gaps in coverage i think
the same is true you know when it comes
to some other issues to me I think there
is a pretty bright line around prisons i
agree with you that the criminal justice
system should not be affected by that
the profit motive that this is the
awesome power of the state saying we can
take somebody's freedom away we can lock
them up because they've breached some
part of the social contract that the
notion that you want in you might
incentivize people to lock more people
in or keeping their longer or not
provide the kind of rehabilitation
services so that they can get out of
there
I think that's a problem and so I'm very
proud of some of the work that we've
been trying to do along these lines we
got more work to do when it comes to
them the media at you know that's a
tougher call because look state-run
media that's what they got in not
state-run but just like it used to be
where it was a loss leader for that for
the network's they didn't have to make
up a profit community is funny because
they had a monopoly though to some
degree right right so that they were fat
and happy in this kind of environment
it's hard to figure out how you would do
that but you know the I think the
question I'd have when it comes to the
media is how do we create a space where
truth gets eyeballs and his entertaining
and we can build a common conversation
at a what is true when i leave here one
of the things I'm most concerned about
is the balkanization of the media where
you've got 800 stations you got all
these websites people have difficulty
now just sorting out what's true and
what's not
yeah and if you don't have some common
baseline effects do you eat we can have
a disagreement about how to deal with
climate change but if
we have a big chunk of the country that
share just discounts what 99% of
scientists a completely it's very hard
to figure out how we move the democracy
forward so I don't have a good formula
for that but i think that it's something
that I'll spend a lot of time thinking
about and seeing if maybe we can build
some platforms where everybody says okay
let's uh let's let's agree on facts and
then argue about means after that
okay let me ask you about a question
that I know people who watch our show
were interested in riches marijuana
reform is that something that you care
about is something I care about its now
we both made jokes about it but it's not
funny to the people who get arrested
yeah which is over half a million i
think last year it you know you and I
both could have had our lives ruined not
really by smoking it but by being
arrested for it right and you know I
feel like you had a checklist about
let's get rid of a lot of the stupid
stuff like opening up Cuba you know you
came out for gay marriage
I was hoping ending the drug war would
be on that list it's on the ballot now
in nine states in a week including
California for recreational and Arizona
and medical in places like North Dakota
is meantime the federal government
caught up to progressive states like
Arizona and North Dakota well IE here
here's what I'm i have always believed
that to the extent that the society
legitimately wants to guard against any
kind of substance abuse that you treated
as a public health problem
look I'm an ex-smoker cigarette smoke
x.x and really yeah
I read your banker did you get some
money right there is thought I got away
I i'm sure the heck out of Nicorette
really yeah but know what I when I
passed healthcare reform that would I
think right I'd had my last cigarette
butt but the reason is because there was
this enormous public health effort to
get kids not to pick up smoking and to
make sure that parents felt guilty if if
they were passing on that that habit to
their kids and I've and so that's where
I think we need to go with pot alcohol
and so so I don't think that
legalization is a panacea but i think
that we're going to have to have a more
serious conversation about how we are
treating marijuana and our drug laws
generally the good news is that after
this referenda to some degree is going
to call the question because if in fact
it past and all these states you know
about a fifth of the country that's
operating under one set of laws
yeah and four-fifths in another the
Justice Department DEA FBI for them to
try to straddle and figure out how
they're supposed to enforce laws in some
places and not in others and they're
going to guard against transferred
transporting these drugs across state
lines but you've got the entire Pacific
chair corridor where where this is this
is legal
that is not going to be tenable now it's
not something that I think is going to
happen overnight and then third some
legitimate concerns that people have
about how you draw lines on these issues
but it is indisputable that right now
the biggest drug crisis we have is with
opioids many of which are legal and are
ravaging
entire communities all across the
country and and though for us to
resource how we think about these
problems and not think of everything
through the criminal justice lens but
also through the public health lens i
think it's something that's going to
need to have okay switching topics I
don't have anybody from my tribe of
atheists ever thank you for giving us a
shout out at your first inaugural but
you didn't mention non-believers ask you
i think it was pardoned once more than
what I mean it's not just a minute
speech I've done it often
well we appreciate it because we do feel
like Untouchables to a degree i mean i
don't know if you saw the latest
religion survey but almost a quarter of
the country are nuns i don't mean the
ones who hit me on the knuckles with a
ruler in Sunday school I mean they put
non for religion of the above right
right there not know they're atheists
agnostics or they just don't want to get
up on sunday right morning and we have
no representation in congress of if our
numbers are represented to be over a
hundred congresspeople right who felt
that way right
it just seems like we are not included
in the basket of diversity in America
which is odd because we are the biggest
minority that is a bigger minority than
any other minority you can name
oh don't you think we should get a
little more love how you know i guess my
question would be whether there is
active persecution of atheists i think
that there are certain well I i think
for granted a tie i think you're right
that there are certain we might be
occupations probably most prominently
politics where there would be a bias
against somebody's who's agnostic or
atheist in running for office
I think that's still true outside of
that arena though that you seem to have
done all right with your TV show i am at
I don't get it
since then I'm going the extent that
they're boycotting cutes because of your
other wacky ideas rather than
your particular view our relationship
whatever better wet idea the you know i
usually agree with you I i think i think
the the average American if they go to
the workplace somebody's next to them
that they're not poking around trying to
figure out what their religious beliefs
are so so so II here's what i would say
that I think that we should foster a
culture in which people's private
religious beliefs including atheists and
agnostics are respected and and that's
the kind of culture that I think allows
all of us than to believe what we want
that's freedom of conscience that's what
our Constitution guarantees and you know
where we get into problems typically is
when our personal religious faith or the
community of faith that we participated
tips into a sort of fundamentalist
extremism in which it's not enough for
us to believe what we believe but we
start feeling obligated to you know hit
you over the head because you don't
believe the same thing or to treat you
as as somebody who was less than that i
am we had be more pro-science in America
if we were less religious don't you
think well you know what i think the the
the issues we have with science these
days are not
restricted to two what's happening with
respect to religion I there's a lot of
free related scientists around i think
the problem is is that in our school
systems and to some degree and this is
where it is relevant with school boards
around the country that are mandating
curriculums and textbooks you start
seeing this weird watering down of
scientific fact
so that our kids are growing up in an
environment this connects with a 210
saying earlier about the media where
everything's contested that that nothing
is true because if it's on facebook
it all looks the same and if you're
reading something from a
nobel-prize-winning physicist next to
some guy in his underwear writing in his
basement you know or his mom's basement
in context it it looks like it's equally
plausible and and part of what we have
to do a better job of if our democracies
of function in a complicated diverse
society like this is to teach our kids
enough critical thinking to be able to
sort out what is true and what is false
what is contestable and and what is
incontestable and and we seem to have
have trouble with that and and are our
political system doesn't help
okay i want to ask you this question
again it's an issue i think we don't get
asked a lot about but it's important to
my audience and I know people will roll
their eyes and say so California ask
this but food purity
yeah something that means a lot to me
somehow it got to be elitist or liberal
I don't get that to want food that isn't
full of pesticides of food that wasn't
created by torturing animals at in
factory farms is in full of antibiotics
which is a problem in itself
I feel like we're upside down on food we
eat too much corn because we grow too
much corn because we subsidize too much
corn
you know one of the problems with the
Affordable Care Act is that people were
found to sikkre right than expected and
that's partly versus the food i think
and obesity and all of work that
michelle has been doing yeah that one
didn't do food be put more at the top of
the agenda when when we come to
addressing health care
there's no doubt about it that right now
we've got a disease care system we
should have a healthcare system and
healthcare system would include
nutrition exercise but also quit pushing
back on corporal and and so angry I i
think what is true is that for a long
time
agribusiness has a day obviously a
prominent seat at the table in Congress
it's bipartisan some of the reforms that
we've tried to initiate for example on
the school lunch program had actually
made some progress on this front and
Michelle deserves a lot of credit for it
as do a bunch of organizations that have
worked on this deal
the the I think the strategy has to be
one of persuasion and has to be more
demand driven in the sense that one of
the things Michelle's finding is that
when she worked with walmart or craft or
what have you and she said look here's
the data this is what parents want the
profit motive can actually work in favor
of food purity as long as there's good
information out there and so part of our
strategy has been how do we make sure
that consumers are aware they've got the
information they need
now i will tell you and this may be
controversial and in some your audience
it is important to look at the science
on this stuff so when it comes to
antibiotics for example the science is
clear we pump our animals full of it and
and that's not just a problem in terms
of what we're in ingesting it's also a
problem that more and more you know
bacteria is becoming resistant resistant
to antibiotics
but in some cases like for example the
GMO debate it there are there areas
where there are legitimate concerns
there are some areas where the science
seems to indicate well this is ok we
hand out back to the signs that says it
doesn't increase the year while exact
NAU's just as many if not more
penetrating well that's so so my point
is what that what we have to be make
sure we're doing whether on the left or
the right is being driven by the science
and if it turns out that some of these
genetically my modified foods aren't
healthier aren't more productive and use
more pesticides then we should follow
the science if in some cases they're not
causing any harm
then we should follow the signs there as
well and that's what what what I've
tried to do in this administration is
and then this goes beyond just you know
nutrition policy what I always say to my
teams are figure out what is right as
far as as best we can tell figure out
what the best policy is figure to hear
what the science tells us figure out
what the facts tell us what would what
our best ideas out there and sort
through and then once you figure that
out then we'll worry about the politics
after that don't start with the politics
and then try to get the facts to fit
into the politics and I think that if he
at minimum what that does is it keeps us
tethered to reality
it makes us go to bed that night feeling
pretty good about it you know what we've
been trying to do because we're not
constantly trying to tack to whatever is
fashionable and what public opinion
you're out there we just try to figure
out as best we can what is the right
answer and and nothing all of that you
think we asked too little of the public
politicians you know of course are
always kissing up to the public and
saying things like if we only had a
government as good as the people but the
people aren't very well-informed
they don't exercise their right to vote
and when they do they don't know much
about it I just feel like we don't we
don't ask the people very much were
afraid to ask the people eat better you
know that the phrase was yes we can and
I feel like they're not pulling their
weight on the wii it's a partnership
with you eat better vote more learn
something no III I actually think that
part of the pitch I've made throughout
my campaign throughout my presidency is
exactly that that change doesn't come
from on high that if you're waiting for
Congress then you're gonna be waiting a
long time even a pretty capable
well-meaning president is going to only
be able to take the country so far
without people ordinary folks all across
the country being engaged being involved
being active I i constantly quote louis
brandeis who said the most important
office in a democracy is the office of
citizen it's not president it's not
senator it's not mayor and so I have
tried consistently to say to the
American people that this is only going
to work if you're engaged now I will
tell you having traveled every state met
with people from every walk of life
people are basically good
I you know I IMA my glass half full guy
and an optimist about the human spirit
you are right though that people are
busy they're stressed and they don't
have time to follow the intricacies of
some debate around Medicaid or what's
going on in Syria and so part of that
but when i say i want a government as
good as the
the American people what i mean by that
is that i think people's instincts and
their gut what that what they what they
want out of life and how they want to
see people treated is actually pretty
good but the question then becomes how
do we get enough information in front of
them to be able to make good decisions i
I've always believed that if i could get
into you know if I could sit in the
living room whatever person in America
over you know that I've got the majority
on my side and a healthy majority on my
side on every issue that we work on just
by having a conversation the problem is
we got all these filters and look at my
watch fox news i wouldn't vote for me
either
right because you know you've got this
screen this fun house mirror through
which people are receiving information
how did how to break through that is a
big challenge that this whole
conversation has been had lately in in
the aftermath of the rise of Trump this
notion that part of what's happened is
that both Republican and Democratic
elites have neglected the white
working-class the truth of the matter is
is that every policy i put forward would
make a huge difference with white
working class and the black working
class and the Latino working class
whether it's raising the minimum wage or
the Affordable Care Act given people
health care who don't have it and you're
working hard and and need help or making
sure that unions are our strong so that
you can have a little more leverage at
the workplace or making sure that you
know something like the consumer finance
Protection Bureau is is Mei is
protecting against some scam mortgage
but what is true is that because it's
hard to get into the details of all
these issues with folks were
around dropping off their kids at school
and trying to punch the clock and
figuring out how to make ends meet and
just want to relax when they come home
and not watch you know meet the press
then in that environment a lot of what
people take in is just symbols and
signifiers and you get into identity
politics and culture wars and and and
what I'd like to figure out and i think
democrats do have an affirmative
obligation to do that do this is is to
work harder to to to to figure out in in
this new age
what's the equivalent of getting into
people's living rooms and being able to
have a conversation and being able to
listen people and and and I've been able
to do this successfully during my
campaigns i have not always been able to
do it is successfully here in this White
House partly because this bubble that's
created around me
there's American need to be an empire we
have more troops in more places than any
Empire in the history of the world we
spent over six hundred billion on
defense and that's not including the
nukes taking care of veterans homeland
security when you add it all up it's
probably over a trillion to keep the
monsters away i'm wondering if we could
be just to save spending half as much
eisenhower warned when he was close to
the end of his second term like you are
now about the military-industrial
complex and it seems no president of
either party ever makes any progress on
that pushing back on that will it ever
happened did you want to do that well
and look at that I had keep in mind
billet when i came into office we had a
hundred eighty thousand truths just in
Iraq and Afghanistan
now we only have about 15,000 so that
that's pretty big
we still spend a bunch of folks still
spend morale you know actually are
spending I think his has been steady e
here's what I'd say that humility and
foreign policy is is a useful trait
particularly in the Oval Office think
bad things happen around the world and
our natural instinct is we should do
something there are times where our
intervention makes a difference but
there are a lot of times where the
unintended consequences can result in
more problems when we intervene and
sorting out where those where those
issues play out is I think one of the
biggest challenges that any president
has my bias is that if it comes to
defending the American people against
al-qaeda ISIL somebody wants to blow up
a train station in midtown Manhattan
that i'm going to go after them and I
make no apologies about it and I want a
vigorous military in place and when it
comes to maintaining a basic
international order so that a guy like
Kim Jong on in North Korea doesn't
suddenly start holding all of Asia
hostage because he is building bunch of
nuclear weapons and and feels free to
threaten everybody else it's important
for us to have alliances in place and to
be able to work on the international
scene and us having the most powerful
military on earth helps that happen
it helps check the impulses of some
other
bad folks and and i will tell you as
somebody who has now served as commander
in chief for the last eight years not
only are the men and women in uniform
that I work with extraordinary you know
you meet 23 year olds who are in charge
of life and death what missions and
maintaining billion-dollar pieces of
equipment and they just execute and do
it unbelievably well but what you also
discover is my top brass Joint Chiefs of
Staff they're not the chickenhawks who
are going around trying to get us into
every single war at you know the the
generals the cardinals the the the
commander's that I work with they know
that the wages of war and they're
actually pretty thoughtful about it and
typically in the Situation Room they're
the ones who are like well before we go
half-cocked on something
let's really think about this because
this is what would be involved and they
have seen what what's involved because
most of them are people who were
fighting in Iraq and fighting in
Afghanistan and they know how hard these
environments are and and that no matter
how good our intentions a lot of times
they can go haywire
but having said all that I think we
should ever strength i think we should
have humility I think we have to
wherever possible work multilaterally
and not just unilaterally because if we
can't organize coalition's to do things
that means that maybe weren't we haven't
thought everything through having said
all that it turns out that is as flawed
as sometimes our foreign policy can be
or whatever blind spots we have we
really are the indispensable nation if
we it if there is a no typhoon
that wipes out someplace in Southeast
Asia our military is the only
organization that has the infrastructure
to help those folks quickly when bola
came out we actually had to build the
platform whereby everybody else could
even think about bringing their doctors
and nurses and if you have a rogue
nation that decided it was going to you
know take action that that significantly
threatened a lot of people I'd want to
know that the US military was there and
so and and i can tell you setting aside
our military power there's not an
international meeting i go to in which
if we weren't sitting at the table
nothing to get done because for the most
part other countries don't have either
the capacity or the inclination and when
you've got a bunch of authoritarian
governments out there and a creeping
authoritarianism pulse around the world
we also are the ones who are pushing
back most effectively in perfectly but
most effectively against locking up
journalists and killing human rights
activists and making sure that poor
people get food and dealing with public
health crises
I think if it if you see the world from
my seat I won't have sort of as assorted
that the one thing I think is important
for progressives to guard against is a
tendency sometimes to not fully
appreciate that America is a bad guys
trying that America's are pretty it is
not just a great nation in the sense
that it's powerful but that our values
and I rnr ideals actually matter and we
do a lot of good around the world and
there's some things that we do that are
either ineffective or imperfect but
there's a lot to be proud of and there's
a lot to build on and now what we gotta
do is make sure that we get our own
house in order so that we can be and
they know you're off to Ohio right
you've got an election to rig and I want
you I want you to get out there because
a boy it's it's a very nervous time for
us to people who are worried about mr.
Trump that the stakes are high
I i know we you know we were getting the
we get in there
we're getting gone it but it's a but I
will say this that choice in this
election is should be really clear and
apparent and anybody who's watching your
show and was a supporter of mine was a
supporter of Bernie's do is a
progressive generally this idea that
somehow well you know both of them have
problems and here nothing will change
either listen all the progress we've
made on climate change Paris agreement
hfc
agreement aviation agreement the 20
million people who have health insurance
that right now that didn't have it
before all the progress that we've made
on trying to check the excesses Wall
Street and dodd-frank and the and the
seat consumer finance Protection Bureau
any chance of immigration reform
including the work that we did to make
sure that these amazing dream our kids
all across the country or now going to
college or serving in our military or
not suddenly deported or at risk of
deportation every single issue that
we've made progress on over the last
eight years is going to be on the ballot
in the form of this choice and i have
worked with Hillary Clinton I know her
and she is somebody who cares about
these issues she does her homework she
cares deeply about ordinary folks her
policies are aligned with yours and mine
and yes she is somebody who believes in
compromising that you don't get a
hundred percent of what you want but you
know what that's the way this democracy
and works anybody sitting on the
sidelines right now or decided to engage
in a protest mode that's a vote for
Trump and that would be badly damaging
for this country and it would be damned
damaging for the world so yeah no
complacency just to get out there get
out there it
thank you so much did a hell of a job in
this offer right now I speak for myself
and my only one means a lot that you did
this
everything that I wasn't on the show
that often i watched it all the time
really well that's nice to hear
Thank You mr. president appreciates all
right